Post: Extending material theme in Jetpack Compose. (#146)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2021-05-07-compose-themes.md

---
layout: post
title: Extending Material theme in Jetpack Compose
date: 2021-05-07 10:00:00
tags: [Material, Themes, Material theme, Custom material theme, theming compose, customizing themes, Jetpack Compose]
category: development
author_id: mirland
show: true
featured_image: /images/extending-material-theme-in-jetpack-compose/banner.jpeg
permalink: /blog/extending-material-theme-in-jetpack-compose/
---

> Building Android UIs with a consistent look and feel is easier than ever by using the new [Jetpack Compose] framework and setting up themes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building Android UIs with a consistent look and feel is easier than ever by using the new [Jetpack Compose] framework and setting up [themes](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/themes).
```

> Compose offers an implementation of the Material design that makes it easy to use Material style throughout the whole app just by adding few lines of code.
> You can read more about Compose themes at the [official documentation](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/themes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compose offers an implementation of the Material design that makes it easy to use Material style throughout the whole app. 
```

> As you may already know, Material theme allows us to have a consistent and uniform UI that follows Android UI best practices and guidelines, but at the same time, it's super rigid and limited when the app needs a more complex UI customization level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may already know, Material allows us to have a consistent and uniform UI that follows Android UI best practices and guidelines, but at the same time, it's super rigid and limited when the app needs a more complex UI customization level.
```

In this post, we'll learn how to adapt, customize and extend Compose Material Theme in order to fulfill your app UI requirement and get rid of material limitations. 

# What's an application theme?
[Android Theme] is just a collection of resources that are useful throughout a given application.
Each resource has a semantic name such as `colorPrimary` that can be used as a reference from different places on the app.

> Most Android apps already follow [Material Design Guidelines], that's the reason Jetpack Compose provides the `MaterialTheme` implementation for Compose apps.
> It's a systematic way to customize Material Design to better reflect your product’s design needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Android apps already follow [Material Design Guidelines], that's the reason Jetpack Compose provides the `MaterialTheme` implementation for Compose apps, which is a systematic way to customize Material Design to better reflect your app style and branding.
```

> Most Android apps already follow [Material Design Guidelines], and that's the reason Jetpack Compose already provides the `MaterialTheme` for Compose apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Android apps already follow [Material Design Guidelines], and that's the reason Jetpack Compose provides the `MaterialTheme` for Compose apps by default.
```

> It's a systematic way to customize Material Design to better reflect your product’s design needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Material Theme comprises [color], [typography], and [shape] attributes.

### Sounds good, but is it perfect?

> Material does a great job making sure every app follows android UI guidelines, but it clearly lacks flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material does a great job making sure every app follows Android UI guidelines, but it clearly lacks flexibility.
```

> So, here lies the first problem: you have to adapt your look and feel to the Material guidelines, and if you don't, then it becomes hard to use it.
> Secondly, Material comprises only [color], [typography], and [shape] attributes, but what if your app needs more resources, such as dimensions or icons?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, here lies the first problem: you have to adapt your look and feel to the Material guidelines, and if you don't, then it becomes hard to use it.

Secondly, Material comprises only [color], [typography], and [shape] attributes, but what if your app needs more resources, such as dimensions or icons?
```

We create an [`AppShapes`] class and an [`AppTypographies`] class the same way and declare custom theme properties.

I will not explain the code because it's , you can also find it on [Gong repo](https://github.com/xmartlabs/gong/tree/b0b617e/app/src/main/java/com/xmartlabs/gong/ui/theme) and if you have any questions, don't forget to comment!

# Adding custom resources to your theme

So far, we've learned how to extend the properties provided by Material, but what if our app requires new ones?
Remember, a theme is a semantic resource set, so we could also need dimensions, icons, or any other resource to build the custom app UI.

## Defining dimensions in our theme

Dimensions are something that we usually define in our theme since many of them have a meaning in our app context.
Examples are list items' padding, a "small size", and a container margin.

We can use a similar approach here and define a dimension class:

```kotlin
@Immutable
data class AppDims(
    val textSizeSmall: TextUnit,
    val textSizeMedium: TextUnit,
    val textSizeRegular: TextUnit,

    val listItemVerticalPadding: Dp,
    val listItemHorizontalPadding: Dp,
)
```

> That's all fine, but you may be asking yourself a question which is: what are the actual advantages?
> First, your theme will be consistent.
> You can reuse the dimensions in multiple places throughout your app and thus make sure the correct values are enforced.
> Second, you gain flexibility as you can define custom dimensions based on the device's state or specs.
> A practical example, considering devices with small screens, is to define a separate set of dimensions for them to improve the user experience.
> Last but not least, you avoid magic numbers making your codebase more maintainable and readable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's all fine, but you may be asking yourself a question which is: what are the actual advantages?

First, your theme will be consistent.
You can reuse the dimensions in multiple places throughout your app and thus make sure the correct values are enforced.

Second, you gain flexibility as you can define custom dimensions based on the device's state or specs.
A practical example, considering devices with small screens, is to define a separate set of dimensions for them to improve the user experience.

Last but not least, you avoid magic numbers making your codebase more maintainable and readable.
```

```kotlin
@Composable
fun appDims() = if (LocalConfiguration.current.screenWidthDp < 300) {
  smallDeviceAppDims
} else {
  regularAppDims
}

private val regularAppDims = AppDims(
    textSizeSmall = 12.sp,
    textSizeMedium = 14.sp,
    textSizeRegular = 16.sp,

    listItemVerticalPadding = 27.dp,
    listItemHorizontalPadding = 30.dp,
)

private val smallDeviceAppDims = AppDims(
    textSizeSmall = 12.sp,
    textSizeMedium = 13.sp,
    textSizeRegular = 14.sp,

    listItemVerticalPadding = 15.dp,
    listItemHorizontalPadding = 14.dp,
)
```

Then, you have to add the `AppDims` to your `AppTheme` just like we did with the `AppColors` example.
Check out [the complete code in Gong repo](https://github.com/xmartlabs/gong/blob/b0b617e/app/src/main/java/com/xmartlabs/gong/ui/theme/AppDims.kt).

# Conclusion
UI/UX is one of the most important aspects of a mobile app.
Material has some guides to help improve it and also allows you to be consistent with other apps on the same platform.

> Themes allow for consistency throughout an application, especially if you define it at the beginning, just by applying minor configurations.
> However, we saw that Material themes lack flexibility, and if designers don't stick 100% to their guidelines, you may be in trouble as you will have to maintain many separate theme components not handled directly by your app theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Themes allow for consistency throughout an application, especially if you define it at the beginning, just by applying minor configurations.

However, we saw that Material themes lack flexibility, and if designers don't stick 100% to their guidelines, you may be in trouble as you will have to maintain many separate theme components not handled directly by your app theme.
```

---
layout: post
title: Extending Material theme in Jetpack Compose
date: 2021-05-07 10:00:00
tags: [Material, Themes, Material theme, Custom material theme, theming compose, customizing themes, Jetpack Compose]
category: development
author_id: mirland
show: true
featured_image: /images/extending-material-theme-in-jetpack-compose/banner.jpeg
permalink: /blog/extending-material-theme-in-jetpack-compose/
---

Building Android UIs with a consistent look and feel is easier than ever by using the new [Jetpack Compose] framework and setting up [themes](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/themes).
Compose offers a Material theme implementation that makes it easy to use Material style throughout the whole app. 

> As you may already know, Material allows us to have a consistent and uniform UI that follows Android UI best practices and guidelines, but at the same time, it's super rigid and limited when the app needs a more complex UI customization level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may already know, Material allows us to have a uniform UI that follows Android UI best practices and guidelines, but at the same time, it's super rigid and limited when the app needs a more complex UI customization level.
```

> In this post, we'll learn how to adapt, customize and extend Compose Material Theme in order to fulfill your app UI requirement and get rid of material limitations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we'll learn how to adapt, customize and extend Compose Material Theme in order to fulfill your app UI requirements and get rid of material limitations. 
```

A practical example, considering devices with small screens, is to define a separate set of dimensions for them to improve the user experience.

Last but not least, you avoid magic numbers making your codebase more maintainable and readable.

```kotlin
@Composable
fun appDims() = if (LocalConfiguration.current.screenWidthDp < 300) {
  smallDeviceAppDims
} else {
  regularAppDims
}

private val regularAppDims = AppDims(
    textSizeSmall = 12.sp,
    textSizeMedium = 14.sp,
    textSizeRegular = 16.sp,

    listItemVerticalPadding = 27.dp,
    listItemHorizontalPadding = 30.dp,
)

private val smallDeviceAppDims = AppDims(
    textSizeSmall = 12.sp,
    textSizeMedium = 13.sp,
    textSizeRegular = 14.sp,

    listItemVerticalPadding = 15.dp,
    listItemHorizontalPadding = 14.dp,
)
```

Then, you have to add the `AppDims` to your `AppTheme` just like we did with the `AppColors` example.
Check out [the complete code in Gong repo](https://github.com/xmartlabs/gong/blob/b0b617e/app/src/main/java/com/xmartlabs/gong/ui/theme/AppDims.kt).

# Conclusion
UI/UX is one of the most important aspects of a mobile app.

> Material has some guides to help improve it and also allows you to be consistent with other apps on the same platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material helps in that regard by ensuring every Android app follows Android's UI practices and its overall guidelines. 
```

> Themes allow for consistency throughout an application, especially if you define it at the beginning, just by applying minor configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Themes allow consistency throughout your application, especially if it's configured at the beginning of the app development.
```

However, we saw that Material themes lack flexibility, and if designers don't stick 100% to their guidelines, you may be in trouble as you will have to maintain many separate theme components not handled directly by your app theme.

> In this post, we teach you how to overcome all these issues by extending the Material theme while making it flexible to adapt it to your product.
> The code in this blog should be useful for most applications, but I recommend you check out [the full implementation on GitHub](https://github.com/xmartlabs/gong/tree/b0b617e/app/src/main/java/com/xmartlabs/gong/ui/theme), and adapt the general ideas to your specific use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this post, we teach you how to overcome all these issues by extending the Material theme while making it flexible to adapt it to your product.
```
